In the fourth week of this class, we performed the first half of a common
synthetic biology technique known as a genetic knockout. With this process,
scientists can selectively add or remove a gene sequence from an organism. The
drawback of the current technique is that despite having a fairly simple
initial first half (merely a transformation of the desired DAN with a
Kanamyacin-resistant gene), the second half, removal of the Kan resistance, is
complicated and lengthy. Several steps are required, each involving multiple
controls for screening and no guarantee that the target DNA remains unmodified
throughout. Because of the time consuming, potentially inaccurate nature of
the method,  a new method has been devised that consists of only two
transformation steps and a simple selection scheme. The advantage of this
"seamless knockout" technique are several fold. One, the procedure leaves no
residual DNA or byproduct in the cells. Two, the techniques involves only two
transformations, which are essentially repeats of the process with different
DNA fragments. Three, the lack of any residual DNA from previous procedures
means the process is theoretically continuously repeatable.

In our project we decided to produce a series of protocols that instruct the
user through one-half of the whole process. To carry out the whole procedure,
the metacol is repeated twice. This choice allows for grater ranges of
procedure configurations only because the inputs and outputs of the system are
similar in type. The inputs are: a desired DNA knockout (or knock-in) oligo,
(3) three DNA primer sequences (used for PCR screening) and a set of plates
used to screen correctly transformed cells. The output is a strain of bacteria
with the properties of the DNA oligo.

The biology behind the seamless knockout technique is based on two key facts.
First, the thymidylate synthase A (thyA) gene plays a critical part of the DNA
synthesis chain. Without thyA, cells cannot produce the thyamine DNA base.
Second, thyA activity requires tetrahydrofolate (THF). The replenishing of THF
from difolatehydrofolate (DHF) is inhibited by the presence of trimethoprim.
From these facts, a thyA deficient organism can survive on a plate with
thyamine and trimethoprim while a thyA-containing organism cannot. Likewise, a
thyA-containing organism can survive on a minimal media while a thyA deficient
cell will not. By including and removing the thyA gene along with a desired
gene of interest, arbitrary DNA code can be added to a cell. Furthermore, if
care is taken when designing the DNA oligo and DNA fragments, the bases of the
thyA gene (or any arbitrary gene) can be completely removed without any trace.


Primary source:
Efficient and seamless DNA recombineering using a thymidylate synthase A selection system in Escherichia coli
Nucleic Acids Res. 2005; 33(6): e59.
Published online Mar 30, 2005. doi:  10.1093/nar/gni059
